In
November of 63, I
was finishing up my last extra semester. This was
the makeup semester to get my degree, and I had an
English exam. Of course, back in those days, the
semester ended after Christmas sometime in early
January. and so this was like a mid mid semester
exam that we're coming up for and I was on my way from
the MSC over to take this I'd had lunch over at the
MSC and was on my way over to take this midterm exam
when I was walking across the campus and noticed
how somber everyone and a lot of folks were
listening to radios and everything and so I asked
somebody as I was going along they said the
president's been has been shot at and looks like he
has been hit so then I got on over and as I got to the
academic building and started up somebody else
had a little portable radio or maybe had come out of
the building talking about it and I said well what
happened to Kennedy and they said well he's been
shot and he's at the hospital we don't know well by
the time I got up to the classroom and sat down when
the professor came in to start administering the
exam He said, fellas, I know this is going to be
really distracting to you. He said, the president
has been shot. Most of you know that, but we just got
word that the president died. So the president's
been assassinated. He said, but because of the
timing and the scheduling that we have to go
through, I can't dismiss the class. He said, I'd
like to do that, but we just can't do that because
there's no makeup available. so but I want you all
to concentrate on this do the best you can and I'll
take this into consideration and then if when you
get your grades you want to come back one-on-one
and do a retake or do some supplemental stuff to
improve your scores he said I'll consider that and
I thought that was a very Enlightened way to do
things and I always appreciated profs that were
tough and demanding and expected you to learn
stuff but also were flexible enough that you know
if you came in and said you know I had a bad night or
there's been a death in the family or
sometimes even if you were it was your own fault you
were making excuses sometimes if they saw you were
willing to come in and put some extra effort and
that your grades were important to you, not only
your grades, but actually learning something was
important to you, they usually would accommodate
you.
During that day, describe the student body in
general, their attitudes, their values, their
diversity, their economics. What was the Aggie
student body like?
My
impression was it was just, it was normal. Nothing
really stands
out. It was just a reflection of the late 50s and the
early 60s.
I know one of the things that was happening then was
of course the Civil Rights Movement was in its
embryonic stages then and
some of the people got involved in that but they
weren't very many and a lot of people you know just
kind of shrugged you know if there was a march in
Selma or something that somebody said well you
know it varied considerably among my the folks in
my Sunday school class and at church
the ideals were more enlightened because I mean
after all if you're going to spend a lot of money and
pay missionaries to do Christian work in Africa
you know why would you treat people in an
unchristian-like way here in the United States. I
never really understood slavery and redneck
bigotry anyway. And in the summer of 63, between
when my class graduated and I went back for my last
semester to finish my English degree, I went to
East Africa on a project called Operation
Crossroads and spent several months doing a a
summer version of a Peace Corps-type project. And
yet when I was raising money for that in the spring
of 63, I actually had one of my classmates' fathers
ask me, you know, he said, well, how come you want to
go to Africa and live with those niggers over
there? And so there were Still redneck attitudes
in East Texas, but I never really ran across that
much among my generation of folks. I mean, there
were some with prejudices and some didn't want
women or blacks coming to A&M, but most of them
were, you know, kind of open and interested and
kind of willing to evolve and just looking for
leadership. In economic background, generalize
about the Aggies then. I would say middle
to lower middle class. Of course, America's not
supposed to have classes, but just economic
strata. And
I guess really smart kids, if they had guidance,
would have ended up at Rice or Harvard or MIT or
whatever. Stanford or someplace, if someone
guided them. I'd never ever, I'd never even
considered all through high school a service
academy. Nobody had ever incurred, I didn't even
know about it. I might could have qualified, I
don't know. I might could have qualified for Rice
if I had applied, I don't know.
I just, you know, I'd always wanted to be an Aggie,
so a lot of times when people looked down on A&M back
then, and maybe some of it still lingers today,
when people say, well, it's just a little ag
college in Backwater. I don't really pay any
attention to that because I think A&M's got plenty
to be proud of and I think it's a world-class
university and has been for years and years and
maybe its focus has been more engineering and
agriculture as opposed to math, political
science, psychology or other things that other
universities are known for but I think Aggies have
done well representing themselves and competing
all over the world and I don't think A&M then or now
has anything to apologize for and I think it's
always great to want to be a little bit better and to
get your reputation well known nationwide but I
never I never had any ideas that Aggies were low
class or just farmers or hick hillbillies. I
always thought that was, I mean, there were. There
probably always will be some in that category. And
if you're looking to stereotype, you can always
find some examples to support that. As far as you
knew in the student body when you were here,
geographically, were they from small towns,
country, big cities, or what?
You probably already know the answer to this, but I
would say in the late 50s, early 60s,
I would guess maybe 55, 45, maybe 60, 40 that they
were from rural, small, medium-sized towns with
the minority being from larger cities. I think
that probably has evolved. It's probably closer
to 50-50 or maybe 45-55 the other way where more
from the larger size cities but I don't know you
probably have a better answer on that than I do. Was
everybody accepted? Did it matter where you were
from? What your dad did for a living? Not as long as
you behaved yourself and made an effort to join in
and mix with the group. Now if you were standoffish
or if you felt elite and holier than thou you
wouldn't fit in very well or if you were so shy and
introverted that you wouldn't participate you
know but it just what it was your own attitude that
made the difference. Describe the religious
activities in those days particularly describe
the Baptist Student Union. Where did it meet and
how often? Baptist Student Union was at Northgate
on the main street. What's the street? It runs by
the post office and runs by Hollick's and down
there. The First Baptist Church was on the
right-hand side as you go north, and the Baptist
Student Union was right across the street. I'd
usually go over there maybe one or two nights a
week. week for an hour or two for you know
fellowship and maybe Bible study maybe a
motivational speaker or something and I was
usually over there at
the church usually on Sunday mornings and a lot of
times on Sunday evenings. Was there a scheduled
Sunday evening BSU event? Usually those were, I'm
trying to remember whether that was
church-related, a training union. Baptists
usually have both the morning Sunday school and a
training union Bible studies in the evening, and a
lot of times they'll have a Bible study on
Wednesday evenings, and then either a prayer
meeting or or a choir practice if you're in the
choir. And I did sing in the choir at the church. And
right now it's kind of a blur as to what was
happening at the church and what was over across
the street at the BSU. It seemed like the BSU was
more weeknight activity. There might have been
sometimes a Sunday evening activity over there.
But I remember signing up for a there was actually a
credit course in I can't remember if it was the
Bible or comparative religion and Prof Smith was
the one who taught that taught it right there at the
BSU but it was sanctioned for credit but you didn't
have to pay any tuition for it but you did have to
meet you had to show up you had to take course to pass
the test and everything but and I did take I believe
I took because I'd have to look on my transcript and
see. I was under the impression that it was for
credit. I'd have to look on my transcript to see if
it was recognized by A&M. I think it was. Well, it
was. Yeah, okay. All right, let's shift to
athletics. Describe a typical home games
Saturday, football Saturday. What time did you
guys get up and get moving and so forth? What was it?
I just remembered that home games were very, there
was a lot of activity around. We did, even the days
leading up to it, there were yell practices. We did
the banner in the Grove. It was in the Grove. I
thought at that point it always had been and always
would be. I mean, the Grove was one of the
traditions. And when I got back, came back to work
here at A&M in early 91, I was kind of disappointed
to see that the Grove had kind of passed into
oblivion. As a matter of fact, is it still there? I
believe it's still there, but it's not used very
much. I don't think it's used much at all. So, but
the other activities, the big canvas signs that
hang from the dorm, the little caricatures and
cartoons, the spirit signs, I remember having
those laid out in one of our, well the only meeting
room in the dorm. In fact, it wasn't even big enough
to hold the whole sign spread out. you had to work on
it in sections and some of the guys that were in
architecture or might have had a natural artistic
flair knew how to proportion these things so that
they'd come out looking readable and legible and
funny when you hung them on the dorm but that
usually took several hours I remember working a
little bit on one of those, but I was not that
artistically inclined, and had other things that
I had to do at the MSC, so I didn't work on those very
much, but I know my classmates did, spent a lot of
time on those. Where did you and your buddies at the
games, where did y'all stand?
On the east side, kind of probably right about end
of the end zone line in the horseshoe and
just the traditions of the 12th man and standing
during the game and all that. I don't remember much
being unusual or unique about that other than
what's typical of Aggie lore. Do you remember any
pranks or good bull during a football game or a
football season? you and your buddies?
I don't remember whether any of this happened
during my four years or whether this was just
hearsay from previous or past years but You know,
things like stealing Bevo or stealing the Baylor
Bear or Mustangs. I was not involved in any of that,
and I heard a lot of war stories, and I didn't know if
that was old eggs trying to incite the new eggs to
new exploits or if that was something that had been
done fairly recently. Looking back on it now, I
can't remember whether any of those were really
noteworthy during my tenure there or not. Did you
ever help steal a footlocker? on a senior's
footlocker. No, I didn't. And yours didn't get
stolen. No. Any favorite football game memories?
You remember any?
Well, I do remember when we played University of
Texas, I believe that was in November of 62,
because Jim Keller was the quarterback. and there
was a controversial play in the end zone that the
call didn't go for A&M and Texas won the game as a
result of it and I remember us being really
irritated about that and as I recall I don't
remember if television was widespread at that
time or not or if it was still photos or something
but the after the game evidence indicated that
that call should have gone for A&M, and it didn't.
But it's one of those things. I'm not saying the
refs threw it. It was just a tough close call, and it
went the wrong way. As far as you knew, did athletes
go to class in those days? As far as I know, because I
had some classes with some of them. I don't know if
they went regularly, or if they were cut a lot, or if
they were tutored a lot. I don't really know that
much about how things went then. I was kind of busy
with my own career and with the MSC. My sophomore
year, sometime during the middle of the year, the
chairman of the Great Issues Committee for some
reason either resigned or left or dropped out or
something. So I became committee chairman for
Great Issues as a sophomore. And then that spring,
When the selections came up for the officers for
the next year, I was elected to be vice president of
the MSC Council and Directorate. And so in
September of 61,
when they had the president's reception for the
freshmen, I was, as the vice president of the MSC
Council and Directorate, I was standing there
with Dean and Mrs. Hannigan, and my predecessor,
Mike Schneider, was standing there with
President and Mrs. Rutter as hundreds, if not
thousands, of freshmen filed through the MSC. And
I can remember Mrs. Rutter telling us during a
break and sitting there, and she was always a
charming and gracious lady, she said, She said,
you know, I love these things, but man, I love to sit
down and get off my feet for a few minutes. What was
your impression of Earl Rudder? I
was always very much impressed with him, not just
because of his record, because I really didn't
know that much about his record. I knew he'd been
with the Rangers and had led them up the cliffs of
Pointe d'Hoc, and
I knew he was a war hero and had done that as a
lieutenant colonel. and then he had subsequently
come back and I think he'd been a football coach and
a mayor and out in Brady and then was elected to the
or appointed to Texas Land Board Land
Commissioner Land Commissioner and had cleaned
up a pretty messy situation politically And I knew
that vaguely. I knew more about it and had that
reinforced in later years, but I knew a little bit
about his background, and I knew he was a strong
leader, no-nonsense type guy. And
he and Mrs. Rutter used to host fireside chats over
at their home, the big wooden house that burned in
December of 63. In fact, I was over at the MSC and
having lunch, and as we came out, we looked up, we
could see the smoke, and were able to walk over
there and saw that fire in progress. But back in 61
and 62, when I was vice president and then later
president of the MSC Council and Directorate, I
was one of the student leaders invited over, I
would say maybe once or twice a semester, to their
home or it might be on call if there was some issue or
some incident that had happened that he wanted to,
you know, test the water, see what was happening,
or maybe ask for our help in getting things calmed
down. We'd go over there, and Mrs. Rutter always
served punch or tea, or not tea unless it was iced
tea, but soft drinks and cookies. She always had
homemade cookies. And we would talk in exchange,
and just being able to express an opinion or to
raise an issue I thought was... was good and I
always thought he was eminently reasonable. I was
kind of on the fence when the decisions came and
that was during my tenure regarding both the
non-compulsory membership in the cadet corps
even for the first two years and introducing women
to the campus and I could see arguments pro and con
on both sides, so I was kind of on the fence. Also the
name change came up during that time. That was a lot
of pivotal things happening in those years. And of
course I was even aware at that time, even though I
never participated with it, of the, I believe that
particular group was called, was it called the
Century Council? The Century Study. The Century
Study. And I think the participants in that,
sometimes maybe informally, were referred to as
the Century Council. And
they were looking at what do we want A&M to be in
1976, which was the 100th anniversary. And that
was just less than a decade away. It was time to plan
ahead for that. And so... Sometimes when people
were over there, I would make a comment or I would
talk to them like John Lindsay. I ran into John
Lindsay over there and people on the MSC Council,
you know, it's made up of students, some faculty
members, and some former student members. And I
never made a formal presentation, never
submitted a formal paper on anything, but I
remember discussing things like that with a lot of
different people. being in a position and being
respected and trusted enough to participate in
those kind of discussions was always very highly
motivating for me. Did you have any impression of
what Mr. Rutter's feelings were about those
topics?
I always sensed that he was neutral that was my
feeling at the time he was probing he was he was
asking people for pros and cons and yet in
retrospect I think he must have been in favor of it
because if he had been against it he could have
squelched it just by not having it on the agenda as
often as he did And I was, in a way, I was kind of
surprised, but then it kind of all fell into place
when I found out years later about his secret
meetings with the senator from Bryan. Bill Moore.
Bill Moore, where sometimes one or the other would
call or get a call, and they would arrange a
rendezvous in some dark parking lot or some dark
alleyway where they would pull up car to car. open
the window exchange information or strategy or or
you know who's who needs to be contacted who needs
to be brought online for this or that uh and and uh so
in a way that that it doesn't surprise me but it does
confirm that he was in favor of these or at least he
was was won over I really don't know who the drivers
were behind that whether it was Earl Rudder or
whether there were other people encouraging him
to do that. I kind of suspect that John Lindsay was a
big motivator behind that. I don't know if there
were others and I don't know if he felt pressured to
go along with the other powers behind the scene or
whether it was his idea and he was using the powers
behind the scene to bring public opinion around to
the point where it would be accepted or at least it
would be neutral and leave it to his call but
whoever did it however they did it it was effective
and I think A&M is in a lot of respects is better for
it in other respects I guess the argument could be
made that even if A&M were smaller more focused
more concentrated on engineering agriculture
and training military officers it still could be
an important force. Describe the role of the MSC
Council President during that era. What was the
task of that slot?
I'm not sure how much real leadership and
influence you had. It was more like you were
helping to guide a lot of folks who were already
self-motivated. You were helping, you know,
Wayne Stark implement all of the activities of the
MSC, and obviously it's an important, it's a very
important function to be the living room of the
campus, to have nice places for you to bring
visitors, visit with your parents and to have
extracurricular activities. And you were a
coordinator. You were a coordinator. You were a
facilitator. You did budgeting. You did
selection. I think the most important thing was
selecting the leadership for the next generation
and finding people who were qualified
self-starting, self-motivated, because you
really didn't have a lot of power to coerce or to
force somebody to do something that they didn't
want to do or weren't willing to do, but
you could if you knew someone was motivated and
maybe were getting a little bit careless or maybe
were being distracted by girlfriends or academic
problems or core problems or something sometimes
you could maybe help chat with them and encourage
them or maybe get them to a counselor who had the
authority to do something I don't remember any
really big problems except for some my junior year
there were some problems with the student senate
apparently there had been there were some the
student senate president I guess that was also
called the student body president had offices
over in the YMCA and student government was kept
separate from the student union, which was the MSC
activities. And I think Wayne had wanted it that
way. I think he had probably seen enough in other
campuses where student government and student
union could become rivals, especially if they
were two strong personalities. And he just
preferred that they be kept separate. but the
student senate, I believe Malcolm Hall was one of
the, well he was the student body president my
junior year and so he presided over the student
senate and I remember one of their agenda items was
to get space to move over to the MSC. They wanted to
be in the MSC because I think they were I think they
were feeling like second-class citizens, and
they thought the student body president should be
number one and have a place of prominence. And they
may be right. I don't know. I tried not to take a
position one way or the other because I knew Mr.
Stark was not in favor of that. What were some, in
the NSC task you had, what were some of your
greatest frustration moments and positive
moments?
Okay, one incident I remember. It was a little bit
of frustration, anxiety, and then relief.
The SCONA, I guess this was the spring of either 60
or 61, must have been 61, spring of 61.
For the first time, a black delegate was invited to
SCONA. By mistake. And it may have been a mistake,
but... They invited Florida A&M not realizing it
was a black school. Well, no, this guy was, that may
have happened in a subsequent year, but this guy
was from Texas A&I. They invited Texas A&I and they
selected a black delegate or maybe had a black
delegate volunteer and didn't feel like they were
in a position to veto it. And so Vance Shaw, I
believe from Belton or Temple, somewhere over in
Central Texas, was the student who was going to be
coming up. And in fact, that occasioned one of my
visits to the Green Couch. The first one I
mentioned was when we got Dr. Paul Seiple for great
issues. But on this one, Mr. Stark had me in there. I
was not only vice president there. I was not the
only one. There were several of us in there, but
there was...
The vice president of the MSC is ex officio a member
of the Student Senate and a member of the Executive
Committee of SCONA. And so we had some folks in
there brainstorming about how to...